---

title: 01. Meet Kafka
layout: default
parent: Kafka the definitive guide
grand_parent: Books log

---

> **Message**
> The unit of data within Kafka. From the Kafka's point of view, it's simply a byte array without special format or meaning to Kafka. The message can have an *optional* piece of *metadata* called *key*. It can be used when messages should be written to partitions in a more controlled manner.
> For efficiency, messages are written into the Kafka in *batches*. A batch is a collection of messages that should be written to the same topic to the same partition. This used to decrease the number of round trips across the cluster, and this is a trade-off between throughput and latency.  The larger batches - the more messages will be produced in a unit of time, but latency of individual messages will be also increased.

> **Key**
> Optional piece of metadata that uses to identify in which partition message should be placed.
> Can be null, can repeat. With default partitioner messages with the same key will be placed to the same partition(if key isn't null and number of partitions didn't change)

> **Headers**
> Additional piece of metadata that can be sent alongside with the message. Can contain key value pairs. Usually used for lineage to indicate the source of data, for routing or tracing.

> **Topic**
> Collection of messages. Topic consists of *partitions*. Messages are written to it in an *append-only* fashion. Topic typically can consist of multiple partitions, but there's no guarantee of message ordering between different partitions, only within one.
> Partitions also the way Kafka provide scalability and redundancy. Each partition can be hosted on a different server, which means the topic can be scaled horizontally.
> Partitions also can have replicas.

> **Producer**
> Create new messages. By default, the producer will balance messages between all partitions of a topic evenly. But this behavior could be configured by using a custom partitioner.

> **Consumer**
> Read messages from topic. The consumer subscribes to one or more topics and read messages in order they were produced by a *producer*. To track which message already was read - *offset* is used.

> **Offset**
> Integer value that continuously increases. Each message has unique offset and the following message has greater offset. Kafka adds offset to each message as it's produced.

> **Consumer Group**
> One or more consumer that work together to consume a topic. The group ensure that each partition consumes only by one consumer.

> **Broker**
> Single Kafka server. Kafka brokers are designed to operate as a part of a cluster. In this case, one of the brokers will function as a *cluster controller*. Controller is responsible for administrative operations, including assigning partitions to brokers and monitoring failures.

> **Leader of the partition**
> Broker who own a partition.

> **Follower of the partition**
> Broker which responsible to hold *replicated partition*

> **Retention**
> Rules how long messages will be stored in Kafka. Can be configured by time or by topic size. Individual topics can be configured with their personal retention policy.

> **MirrorMarker**
> Kafka project to replicate messages between different clusters.
